After a harrowing chase,
Ethic, Hedge, and their new ally Lemma
find themselves
in a cavernous control room.
Here the last artifact—
the Node of Memory—
is suspended within a force field
and powering a supercomputer.
Ethic is about to deactivate the force
field when Lemma stops her.
She explains, a decade ago,
she was assigned a research task:
to use the world machine to create
something that would make everyone happy.
After many failed attempts, Lemma
discovered a compound that, when ingested,
made people motivated, happy, creative,
loving… in short, their best selves.
It was rushed into production.
Soon, the entire nation’s food supply
came from Huxenborg,
with the compound mixed in.
The first year was paradise.
The second, not so much.
Side-effects began to emerge: memory-loss,
listlessness, and self-absorption.
In the third year,
the government dissolved,
leaving the robots running everything
in a self-sustaining loop.
By this point things were too far gone
for Lemma to reverse.
People had become dependent
on the compound,
and the few who refused it
formed a resistance to try to fix things.
It took 10 years for Lemma to find a cure.
This factory contains everything
she’ll need to make it,
but the second they take
the Node of Memory,
the security system will alert the robots,
and they’ll have to run.
If, instead, they first reconfigure
the factory to manufacture the cure,
the people can be saved.
Lemma has the whole factory redesign
planned out.
The problem is…
it’s a little hard to read.
Her schematic shows all the steps
in the manufacturing process
needed to make the cure.
An arrow from “add nitric acid”
to “shake vigorously”
means that the acid addition
has to happen before shaking.
If a single step is performed
out of order,
the cure won’t work, or worse.
There aren’t any circular references,
where step A requires step B
and step B eventually requires step A.
Here’s where Ethic and Hedge come in.
Lemma needs Hedge to translate
the tangled diagram
into a sequence of steps.
That’ll be the order that things happen
in the factory.
Once input into the central computer,
the factory will reassemble
itself as instructed.
Hedge’s ability to store information
in a table will help here.
So how does Ethic program Hedge
to turn out a correct sequence
that can reconfigure the factory?
Pause now to figure it out yourself.
Rules in 3
Rules in 2
Rules in 1
Hint in 3
Hint in 2
Hint in 1
It may help to first think about
this problem as a human,
rather than a machine.
Given this diagram, it’s clear to start
with getting a bowl,
since no arrows point to it.
How might you mark up the diagram
to figure out what to do next?
Pause now to figure it out yourself.
Solution in 3
Solution in 2
Solution in 1
Diagrams like the one Lemma has drawn
are called directed acyclic graphs.
A graph is a representation of data
that shows different elements
and how they’re related to each other.
Directed means that direction matters—
as indicated by the arrows.
Here A leads to B,
but B doesn’t lead to A.
And acyclic means that there
aren’t any loops.
Which is fortunate, because if there were,
this problem wouldn’t be solvable.
There’s a simple way to navigate
the graph as a human:
start with a step that doesn’t have
any arrows pointing to it.
Once you do that, cross out that step
and all arrows leading from it.
Choose another step with no arrows
pointing to it,
and repeat until you’ve hit every step.
There are two things here that are tricky
to translate for a robot.
First, how do you keep track
of the information?
And second, what do you do if there
are multiple options at the same time?
For the first challenge,
a convenient way for machines
to store information is in a table.
In this case, you can have Hedge
list every step in the headers
of both the rows and columns.
Then he can go through
the rows one at a time.
On the schematic, what points to mix?
Both shake and titrate.
So Hedge should make a mark
in both of their columns.
He can do the same for every row,
one at a time, to make a table like this.
Of course the full table
will be much bigger.
Like a human,
Hedge will also want to start
from one of the steps that has
no arrows pointing to it—
which is the same as having no marks
in its row.
If there’s more than one,
a convenient way to choose is to pick
the one that’s alphabetically earliest,
though other selection methods
can work just as well.
Next, Hedge can add that step
to his running-order list,
delete its entire column from the table—
thus removing all the times
it was a dependency––
and loop back to the start.
Because there are no circular
references in the graph,
each time we get here there’ll be at least
one step with no remaining dependencies.
Hedge can add the alphabetically earliest
to his running-order list,
remove it from the table,
and loop back to the start again.
So now we have a working loop,
and it’ll run through all the elements
in our table until none are left.
Hedge drifts back and forth
over the schematics,
and soon he starts spitting
out instructions,
which Ethic uses to configure
the assembly lines.
With the three working together,
they churn out thousands of doses
of the cure in no time.
Ethic finally plucks the Node of Memory
from its holding field
and trips the alarm.
Within seconds bots are everywhere.
As Ethic falls in shock, the Node
restores not only her own memories,
but reveals the last, missing pieces
of the puzzle.
Ethic built Hedge with a singular purpose:
to construct a maze that would protect
the world machine
from a corrupt government.
But in her haste,
she made a critical mistake.
She forgot to set the condition
that would end the loop
which told Hedge
how large the maze should be.
So Hedge built and built
until he could build no longer.
And then he was conflicted.
He had to build a maze.
But he couldn’t build further
without hurting people
or flying over the Bradbarrier,
both forbidden by his programming.
So he wandered the land
and searched for a solution,
until he happened upon the Node of Power,
the Node of Creation,
and the Node of Memory.
He recognized their true,
collective power
to grant self-awareness
to those who lack it.
With all three he’d be able
to change his programming
and fulfill his drive to transform
the entire world into a giant maze.
It wouldn’t be easy:
the Nodes had safeguards to prevent
robots from taking and using them.
But if Hedge could find the right human
and manipulate her
with the promise of a heroic quest…
well that would be a different story.
A very different story.